How to Reprogram Your Brain to Enjoy Hard Habits
You can make hard habits more attractive if you learn to associate them with a positive experience.
Sometimes, all you need is a slight mind-set shift. For instance, we often talk about everything we have to
do in a given day.
Now imagine changing just one word: You don’t “have” to. You “get” to. You get to wake up early for
work. By simply changing one word, you shift the way you view each event. You transition from seeing
these behaviors as burdens and turn them into opportunities.
The key point is that both the versions of reality are true. We can find evidence for whatever mind-set we
choose.
I asked a man using a wheelchair whether it was difficult being confined, he responded, “I’m not confined
to my wheelchair-I’m liberated by it.
Reframing your habits to highlight their benefits rather than their drawbacks is a fast and lightweight way
to reprogram your mind and make a habit seem more attractive.
Exercise. Many people associate exercise with being a challenging task that drains energy and wears you
down. You can just as easily view it as a way to develop skills and build you up. Instead of telling
yourself “I need to go run in the morning,” say “It’s time to build endurance and get fast.”
Finance. Saving money is often associated with sacrifice. However, you can associate it with freedom
rather than limitation if you realize one simple truth: living below your current means increases your
future means. The money you save this month increases your purchasing power next month.
Meditation. Anyone who has tried meditation for more than 3 seconds knows how frustrating it can be
when the next distraction inevitably pops up in your mind. You can transform frustration into delight
when you realize that each interruption gives you a chance to practice returning to your breath.
Pregame jitters. Many people feel anxious before delivering a big presentation or competing in an
important event. They experience faster breathing, faster heart rate. If we interpret these things negatively,
then we feel threatened and tense up. If we interpret these feelings positively, then we can respond with
fluidity and grace. You can reframe “I’m nervous” to “I’m excited and I’m getting an adrenaline rush to
help me concentrate.
If you want to take it a step further, you can create a motivation ritual. You simply practice associating
your habits with something you enjoy, then you use that cue whenever you need a bit of motivation.
A boxer and writer says, “My focus and concentration goes up by just putting my headphones on while
writing. I don’t even have to play music.
Athletes use similar strategies to get themselves in the mind-set to perform. It not only physically warms
me up, but more importantly, it puts me in the right mental state feeling competitive and focused.
You can adapt this strategy for nearly any purpose. Say you want to feel happier in general. Find
something that makes you truly happy-and then create a short routine that you perform every time you do
the thing you love. Maybe you take three deep breaths and smile. Repeat.
Eventually, you will begin to associate this breath-and smile routine with being in a good mood. It
becomes a cue that means feeling happy. Once established, you can break it out anytime you need to
change your emotional state. Stressed at work? Take 3 breaths and smile. Sad about life? Take 3 breaths
and smile. Once a habit has been built, the cue can prompt a craving, even if has little to do with the
original situation.
In a research, students were divided into two groups, a “quantity” group which would solely be judged
based on the amount of work they produced. The second group was told that they would be judged based
on the excellence of their single work (a near perfect one). At the end of the semester it was found that
surprisingly, the “quantity” group produced best results compared to the “quality” group. This was
because the 1st group were busy experimenting with various things to produce quantity, learning from
mistakes and honing their skills. The quality group sat around speculating about how to produce just
single, perfect job. In the process, they did not produce much output, and the final result was mediocre.
It is easy to get bogged down trying to find out the optimal plan for doing something. Voltaire said: “The
best is the enemy of the good.”
Planning, strategizing, and learning are good things but they do not produce results, only action does.
If you want to master a habit, the key is to start with repetition, not perfection. You don’t need to map out
every feature of a new habit. You need to get practice it.
How Long Does It Actually Take To Form a New Habit?
With each repetition, cell to cell signaling improves and the neural connections tighten. Hebbs law:
Neurons that fire together wire together.
Repeating the habit leads to clear physical changes in the brain. Mathematicians have increased gray
matter in the inferior parietal lobule, which plays a key role in computation and calculation.
In learning to speak a new language, to play on a musical instrument, great difficulty is felt, because the
channels through which each sensation has to pass have not become established; but no sooner has
frequent repetition cut a pathway, then this difficulty vanishes; the actions become so automatic that they
can be performed while the mind is engaged. Both common sense and scientific evidence agree: repletion
is a form of change.
All habits follow a similar trajectory from effortful practice to automatic behavior, a process known as
automaticity.
Scientists have learned that for behavior change: habits form based on frequency, not time (of an activity).
Instead of asking, how long does it take to build a new habit? We should ask, how many repetitions are
required to make a habit automatic.
In practice, it doesn’t really matter how long it takes for a habit to become automatic. What matters is that
you take actions you need to make progress. Whether an action is fully automatic is of less importance.
The truth is, our real motivation is to be lazy and to do what is convenient. Energy is precious, and the
brain is wired to conserve it whenever possible.
If your goal is to do 100 push-ups per day, that’s lot of energy! Sticking to the habit of doing one push-up
per day requires almost no energy to get started. And the less energy a habit requires, the more likely it is
to occur.
Habits like scrolling on phones, checking email, watching TV steal so much of your time because they
can be performed almost without effort.
You don’t actually want the habit itself, but the outcome it delivers. If you make your good habits more
convenient, you’ll be more likely to follow them through on them.
On the tough days, it is crucial to have as many things working in your favor as possible so that you can
overcome the challenges life naturally throws your way. The idea is to make it as easy as possible in the
moment to do things that payoff in the long run.
How to Achieve More With Less Effort
One of the most effective ways to reduce the friction associated with your habits is to practice
environment design. Habits are easier to build when they fit into the flow of your life. You are more
likely to go to the gym if it is on your way to work.
Japanese industries relentlessly looked for ways to remove waste of all kinds from the production process,
by redesigning work places.
Prime the Environment For Future Use
The purpose of resetting each room is to prepare it for the next action.
Want to draw more? Put your pencils, pens, notebooks, and drawing tools on top of your desk, within
easy reach.
Want to do exercise? Set out your work clothes, shoes, gym bag, and water bottle ahead of time.
To avoid watching TV, unplug the TV and take batteries out of the remote after each use, so it takes an
extra ten seconds to turn it back on. Or, take the TV out of your living room.
Whenever possible, I leave my phone in a different room until lunch. When it is next to me, I’ll check it
all morning for no reason at all. Otherwise, ask your friend or a family member to hide it from you for a
few hours.
How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two
40-50 % of our daily actions are done out of habit.
You check your phone for “just a second” and soon you have spent 20 minutes staring at the screen.
Every day, there are a handful moments that deliver an outsized impact. I refer to these little choices as
decisive moments. The moment you decide between driving your car or riding your bike. The moment
you decide between starting your homework or grabbing the video game controller. These choices are like
forks in the road.
Decisive moments set the options available for your future self. The difference between a good/bad day is
often a few productive and healthy choices made at decisive moments. Each one is like a fork in the road,
and these choices stack up throughout the day and can ultimately lead to very different outcomes.
For example, walking into a restaurant decides what you will eat for your lunch, because you can order
only things available on the menu.
Habits are the entry point, not the end point.
The Two-Minute Rule
When you start a new habit, it should take less than two minutes to do.
Read before bed each night- becomes “Read one page.”
Do thirty minutes of Yoga becomes-Take your yoga mat.
Study for class becomes-Open my notes
Run three miles becomes-Tie my running shoes.
The idea is to make your habits as easy as possible to start. Anyone can meditate for one minute, read one
page. This is a powerful strategy because once you’ve started doing the right thing, it is much easier to
continue doing it. A new habit should not feel like a challenge. The actions that follow can be
challenging, but the first two minutes should be easy.


